Blog post: Where is my store stored? (#11)
guillaumewuip/guillaumewuip.github.io: _posts/2021-09-26-where-the-store-is-stored.md

---
title: Where is my store stored?

draft: false

page : false

image: /assets/img/where-is-store-stored-illustration.png 

> excerpt: How looking at where stores are stored in our Javascript codebases is

Reviewer: The excerpt could be a bit catchier, I'll reach back with something

useful to understand the constraints that come with those locations and how the 
stores can be used.

---

<img
  alt="Abstract illustration of a person holding two puzzle pieces"
  src="/assets/img/where-is-store-stored-illustration.png"
  style="max-height: 480px; margin: 2rem auto"
/>

Some of us have concepts in mind that they keep returning to over an over, as if

> they haven't completely internalized them. For me as a frontend software

Reviewer: `haven't` ? or `hadn't` ?

Author: `haven't` I think: "they haven't internalized"

Reviewer 2: `aren't` même mais du coup la phrase mérite une autre tournure IMO

Author: ```suggestion
we haven't completely internalized them. For me as a frontend software
```

better?

Reviewer 2: `Some of us have concepts in mind that we keep returning to over an over, as if
we haven't completely internalized them.`
ou
`Some of us keep returning to the same concepts over and over, as if obsessed by them.` Simple, basique, comme disait Proust.

Author: Top merci, je pars sur la 2nd proposition 🙏

engineer, it's all about the concepts of *State* and *Store*. I keep looking at
technical issues through this prism - current and previous colleagues know this
all too well (sorry colleagues!). I've actually already [written about
it](/tech/posts/2020-11-22-state-store-in-frontend-codebases) in the past.

> I have changed companies a few month ago to join BlaBlaCar and the very cool

Reviewer: A four line sentence is a bit long, do you think splitting it can improve the reading ?

frontend team building and maintaining its web app and find myself in situations
that make me change how I think about the "frontend Store dilemma" I kept
referring to. There is now a new question I ask myself again and again looking
at our frontend codebases:

Where is the store stored?

# State vs Store - one more time 

Let's go back to the difference between the concepts of *State* and *Store*
even though we sometimes use the two terms indistinctively in frontend
codebases. In every frontend app, data (the State) is stored somewhere (the
Store).

When we're thinking about states, we're in the world of ideas. We ask
questions about what those states represent? Which transition between states are
valid? How should we shape our states?

When we deal with stores, we're not in the world of ideas anymore. We're back
in the reality of the code that runs somewhere, mainly in a Javascript runtime.

> We ask where do store out data? How do we read it? How do we write it? How can

Reviewer: I dont understand that sentence 😅  Did you mean `We ask where do we store our data?` instead ?

Author: ahah yup, missing `we` thanks

The reality of the store that lives "somewhere" in the code is the very
problem. The store in itself, whether a simple variable or a full Redux store,
has be stored somewhere in our browser, NodeJS or other fancy javascript
engine runtime. 

Deciding *where our stores are stored* is not trivial and comes with big
impacts. Let me draw here the three main potential locations we can use for our
stores.

## Modules

We can use modules to host our stores. It's quite convenient and it makes full
use of the Javascript ES6 language.

Let's say we have a module storing Cars, our state here.

```js
// cars/store.js

const _cars = []

export function add(car) {
  _cars.push(car);
}

export function list() {
  return _cars;
} 
```

This `cars/store.js` module acts as a very naive store with both *read*
(`list`) and *write* (`add`) functionalities.

Using this store in the rest of the codebase is very easy: we just have to use
classic ES6 imports.

```js
// another/part/of/the/codebase.js
import * as Cars from '../path/to/cars/store';

function doingSomething() {
  console.log('current cars: ', Cars.list());

  const newCar = "My old car";

  cars.add(newCar);
}
```

> And *voilà*! Because ES6 module are statefull, the `_cars` "private" variable

Reviewer: `stateful`*

will stay the same across all imports, making `cars/store.js` a store by itself.

Should we need a reactive store (ie. being able to *subscribe* to state
changes), we would write our own subscribe function by hand or use classic store

> librairies (some opinionated like Redux, Mobx, etc, some more transversal like

Reviewer: I dont think the `etc` brings something here. Remove it, you already point out `some`, we understand it's not exhaustive. Here's my suggestion:

```
some opinionated like Redux, Mobx and some more transversal like the [@fp-51/store (https://github.com/fp51/store-library) I authored one or
two years ago
```

the [@fp-51/store](https://github.com/fp51/store-library) I authored one or
two years ago). 

## Librairies / Framework location

Another very common way of storing our store is using the locations provided by
the main view library or framework we use (React, Vue, etc.).

Let's say that we're using React here. The *go to* store location is then a
simple `useState` hook.

```js
// app.js
import React from 'react';

import { UserContext } from './cars.js'

function App({ children }) {
  const [cars, setCars] = React.useState([]);

  const addCar = car => setCars(cars => [...cars, car]);

  return (
    <MyComponent cars={cars} addCar={addCar} />
  )
}
```

We're not using modules to host our store anymore. React does it for us via
`useState`.  Note that we're reactive by default here: calling `addCar` in
`MyComponent` will rerender all `<App />`.

Using `useState` alone usually doesn't scale well as we're forced to pass `cars`
and `setCar` everywhere through props. The issue is called [props
drilling](https://sebhastian.com/react-prop-drilling/). To overcome this, we
can add a `Context` to make our state and its API available to every child

> components via a simple `useContext` - even if [it's not made for

Reviewer: Funnily, SwiftUI solves this the same way with `@EnvironmentObject`, but they made it clear it was the purpose.

Author: ah interesting !
100% same ideal indeed

that](https://twitter.com/sebmarkbage/status/1219836431972978689). The idea is
the same: the store is stored inside React "runtime" via `useState`.

## Programatic store

> And finally, there's good old way: dependency injection by hand. Let's say we're

Reviewer: there's the **good** old way

in a full custom app (no React shenanigans) and we don't want to use modules. We
can then craft a store instance when the app starts and pass it along everywhere
via function parameters.

Let's write a store factory very similar to the ES6 module option.

```js
// store.js
function buildStore() {
  const _cars = [];

  return {
    add: (car) => {
      _cars.push(car);
    },

    list: () => {
      return _cars;
    },
  }
}
```

Now that our store's factory is ready, we just have to craft a store instance
somewhere in our app's entrypoint and pass it along everywhere.

```js
// index.js

function startApp(store) {
  store.add('new car');

  document.body.innerText = store.list().join(', ');

  // ...
}

function initApp() {
  const store = buildStore();

  startApp(store);
}

initApp();
```

Of course, any function that needs to access the store will have to receive it
via its parameters... We're right back where we left our props drilling issue.

# Pros and Cons of each store location 

> OK so we've outlined three potential store locations. You can see me coming with

Reviewer: OK is something I would say but not write I think.

Author: ok removed !

the list of pros and cons for each of them. 

Let's start with modules. Pros: it's raw ES6 (`import` / `export`) and it is
quite simple to grasp. It's also very flexible. We can do more or less whatever
we want in a module and every part of our codebase can use it.

> But there is a big constraint. Not all codebases always run in the same runtime.

Reviewer: The `always` feels wierd to me in that part of the sentence, I would rephrase as follow:

```
The same codebase can be run in different runtimes.
```

Author: Ok, and the phrase is more to the point with your suggestion 👍

Actually a lot of single page applications run in both browser and NodeJS
runtimes, where the contexts are very different. In the browser, we can make the
assumption that there is only one user at a given time using the runtime. So our
module state will be "our user state". On NodeJS, we will probably use the code
to render the page server-side for multiple HTTP requests. In this situation,

> our module state will be shared between multiple. Boom! Enjoy the data leak

Reviewer: `multiple users` ?

> security issue.

Reviewer: I think you could leave only`data leak` or separate the two notions better.

For library or framework locations such as our React `useState`, the big
advantage is probably the strong integration with the corresponding library.

> Even bigger store solutions like Redux come with their binding like

Reviewer: `bindings` ? If you agree, also change `that does` to `that do`

`react-redux` that does the job for us. No need to handle the Context / Provider
stuff I mentioned. No issue with server-side rendering: the store being "in
React runtime", it will be scoped to the `ReactDOM.render` or

> `ReactDOMServer.renderToString` (which will be called once for every http

Reviewer: As a rule of thumb, I always try to avoid parenthesis when writing. I think those ideas are better included as a plain sentence.

requests).

I'm beginning to think this deep integration with view librairies in a way that
makes server and browser contexts similar is a big factor in the success of
Redux and others (Mobx, etc.).

> The main issue is however that we're locked to the corresponding library /

Reviewer: The choice is opinionated by default, I think this is true for every code. Even If I wanted to move away from SpringBoot, I wouldn't be able to without significant work ...

Author: yep that's the point

framework.  Let's say you have an SPA where you want React to really only be
about the views, and that you need to read / update / subscribe to store change
in other contexts.  You just can't, it's React or bust. Back at square one.

Let's give another chance to our programmatic store sharing solution, ie.
"crafting a store as soon as the app starts and then pass it along to every
subsequent bit of code that needs it through a sort of a handmade dependency
injection".

It's clearly not very convenient to have to pass our store programaticaly to
every part of the codebase as it creates a lot of boilerplate, but at least

> we face no issue with SSR if we craft one store per request server-side, and one

Reviewer: It doesn't cost much to write Server Side Rendering here imo.

Author: Yes that's not really the point of this paragraph: "we face no issue with SSR". Should I rephrase it?

store when the app starts browser-side. It is very flexible as well: we
can do whatever we want with our store and use it everywhere in the codebase.

I didn't mention testing as all three locations look kind of similar to me in
terms of how easy it is to test code that rely on them. We can use full module
mocking (eg. with `jest.mock`). This is especially useful for option 1. We can
also use "programmatic mocks", more or less handcrafted (option 2 and option 3)
by crafting fake stores and passing them to the code that use them (through
injection or by wrapping a fake React `Provider`).

# No one location to rule them all

> There is no perfect solution to host stores with Javascript.  It's all about

Reviewer: double space here

compromises. The module location is very convenient as long as you don't have to

> render your app server-side. We don't have threads or or the luxury of a

Reviewer: double or

single runtime per user there. You may find solutions exploring low level [NodeJS
primitives](https://nodejs.org/api/worker_threads.html) or [V8
functionalities](https://github.com/laverdet/isolated-vm) deep features to
isolate runtimes, but it's certainly not out of the box.

The library / framework location is very convenient but leaves no
room for code outside of the library / framework pattern which is a big issue in my
opinion for big and/or old codebases that have to support multiple technologies,

> historicities and teams.

Reviewer: historicities ? :)

Author: yep yep https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Historicity

Author: `historicités` in french

---
title: Where is my store stored?

draft: false

page : false

image: /assets/img/where-is-store-stored-illustration.png 

excerpt: >
  Not all stores location are equal in our our Javascript codebases. Let's look
  at them to understand the constraints that come with them and how they impact

>   how our stores can be used.

Author: I propose this that is hopefully a bit more catchy @Benrajalu @asauray, wdyt?

Reviewer 2: `how a store's location impacts how it can be used.`

---

<img
  alt="Abstract illustration of a person holding two puzzle pieces"
  src="/assets/img/where-is-store-stored-illustration.png"
  style="max-height: 480px; margin: 2rem auto"
/>

> Some of us have concepts in mind that they keep returning to over an over, as if
> obsessed by them. For me as a frontend software engineer, it's all about the
> concepts of *State* and *Store*. I keep looking at technical issues through this
> prism - current and previous colleagues know this all too well (sorry
> colleagues!). I've actually already [written about
> it](/tech/posts/2020-11-22-state-store-in-frontend-codebases) in the past.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some of us have concepts in mind that they keep returning to over an over, as if
obsessed with them. For me as a frontend software engineer, it's all about the
concepts of *State* and *Store*. I keep looking at technical issues through this
lens - current and previous colleagues know this all too well (sorry
colleagues!). I've actually already [written about
it](/tech/posts/2020-11-22-state-store-in-frontend-codebases) in the past.
```

I have changed companies a few month ago to join BlaBlaCar and the very cool

> frontend team building and maintaining its web app. My this move I found myself
> in situations that make me change how I think about the "frontend Store dilemma"
> I kept referring to. There is now a new question I ask myself again and again
> looking at our frontend codebases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
frontend team building and maintaining its web app. After this move I find myself
in situations that make me change how I think about the "frontend Store dilemma"
I kept referring to. There is now a new question I ask myself again and again
looking at our frontend codebases:
```

Where is the store stored?

# State vs Store - one more time 

Let's go back to the difference between the concepts of *State* and *Store*
even though we sometimes use the two terms indistinctively in frontend
codebases. In every frontend app, data (the State) is stored somewhere (the
Store).

> When we're thinking about states, we're in the world of ideas. We ask
> questions about what those states represent? Which transition between states are
> valid? How should we shape our states?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we're thinking about states, we're in the world of ideas. We ask
questions about what those states represent, which transition between states are
valid, or how should we shape our states.
```

> When we deal with stores, we're not in the world of ideas anymore. We're back in
> the reality of the code that runs somewhere, mainly in a Javascript runtime.  We
> ask where do we store out data? How do we read it? How do we write it? How can
> we subscribe to changes?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we deal with stores, we're not in the world of ideas anymore. We're back in
the reality of the code that runs somewhere, mainly in a Javascript runtime.  We
ask where do we store out data, how do we read it, how do we write it, how can
we subscribe to changes?
```

> In this post, we're focusing on "store" kind of questions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this post, we're focusing on the "store" kind of questions.
```

# The multiple places we can store our stores

The reality of the store that lives "somewhere" in the code is the very
problem. The store in itself, whether a simple variable or a full Redux store,
has be stored somewhere in our browser, NodeJS or other fancy javascript
engine runtime. 

Deciding *where our stores are stored* is not trivial and comes with big
impacts. Let me draw here the three main potential locations we can use for our
stores.

## Modules

We can use modules to host our stores. It's quite convenient and it makes full
use of the Javascript ES6 language.

> Let's say we have a module storing Cars, our state here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's say we have a module storing Cars (our state here).
```
